# SBB-dispersal

Dispersal ability is a fundamental trait for determining connectivity and gene flow between metapopulations, but its phenotypic expression can also be plastic among individuals. As environments change, often drastically, due to human activities, dispersal-behavioral plasticity can become a key mediator in the direct and indirect interactions between an individual and its altered environment, determining their overall success or failure to respond appropriately. However, little is known about the traits and ecological processes that affect plastic dispersal responses and which agents in a population are driving those responses. Our goal was to provide insights into explaining such traits and ecological processes by measuring flight behavior and wing morphology in a host plant-insect system undergoing evolution in response to human-induced rapid environmental change (HIREC). Since the 1960s, populations of the red-shouldered soapberry bug from Florida, USA, originally feeding on the seeds of *Cardiospermum corindum* on the islands, quickly adapted to feeding on an invasive, ornamental tree, *Koelreuteria elegans*, on the mainland, which led to host-specific wing polyphenism. We measured the morphology of >3,500 soapberry bugs field collected from 2013 to 2020 as well as the flight performance of 378 soapberry bugs tested in a flight mill during Fall 2019 and Winter 2020. We found novel sex-specific and host-specific plastic flight responses, repeatedly mediated by mass changes. Flight tests showed females and mainland natives from *K. elegans* exhibited more variable flight responses, suggesting trade-offs between flight potential and reproduction or host plant, while males and island natives were consistent, homogeneous flyers. Males were 2.5x more likely to fly than females and were also 1.3x more likely to be long-winged. However, historical specimens showed annual rises in flightless morphs for males since 2013. Soapberry bugs collected from *C. corindum* since 2013 also showed dwindling wing-to-body sizes annually. Over time, sex-specific fitness implications could exacerbate and windows of high dispersal for populations on the native host could narrow. In turn, under the context of a system undergoing HIREC, plastic traits could help predict dispersal behavior, and ultimately, help identify whether recent trends signal adjustment or maladaptation to environmental changes.
